Add blog post for Release 10.9.0 (#949)
jellyfin/jellyfin.org: blog/2024/04-28-jellyfin-release-10.9.0/index.mdx

* Fedora/CentOS/RHEL/etc. users: We have dropped our official RPM packages and suggest moving to [the 3rd-party RPMFusion repository](https://admin.rpmfusion.org/pkgdb/package/free/jellyfin/). Support for RHEL-like distributions has been a major pain point for us for a very long time, and we feel that letting the community over at RPMFusion handle this is in our best interest going forward, similar to how Arch, Gentoo, etc. packages are handled. For more details, please see [our previous blog post](https://jellyfin.org/posts/new-ci-new-repo).

* Docker users: We now offer GHCR as an alternative container registry in addition to DockerHub. You can pull images from the new registry via URIs like `ghcr.io/jellyfin/jellyfin:latest`. Don't worry, we have no plans to drop DockerHub as a container registry, but we feel providing both gives users more choice and flexibility.

## The Big Changes

> This release has been nearly (over?) two years in the making, so we're really glad to finally get it out to you. The long cycle does mean quite an extensive changelog however, with well over 1100 pull requests merged into our `master` branch since 10.8.0 first dropped back in 2022. This section will detail all the big changes, broken up by general function and area of the system. In addition to these big items, there are hundreds of smaller bugfixes, quality-of-life tweaks, and other minor changes that we won't touch on here, but if you want to see the full list, you can do so over on the GitHub releases for [the core server](https://github.com/jellyfin-sandbox/jellyfin/releases/tag/v10.9.0) and [the Web UI](https://github.com/jellyfin-sandbox/jellyfin-web/releases/tag/v10.9.0).

Reviewer: These links are wrong. Is this wanted?

Author: Nope good catch.

* Improved handling of IP binding to fully respect these settings (including DLNA and SSDP).

### Packaging

* The `jellyfin` service user is now automatically added to the `render` and `video` groups on Debian/Ubuntu systems for new installs, helping improve the onboarding for hardware acceleration.

* Packaging is now unified with a new CI system, as outlined in [our previous blog post](https://jellyfin.org/posts/new-ci-new-repo). As a normal user you should see no change here, but this helps massively improve the build process, and if you are building your own packages please reference [the new packaging repository](https://github.com/jellyfin/jellyfin-packaging) for the updated process.

### Transcoding & FFmpeg

* Several audio improvements: support for Opus, FLAC, and ALAC codecs in the HLS engine; improved support and handling for transcoding DTS and TrueHD audio streams; new codec enforcement; better bitrate calculations; new audio normalization features; and stereo downmixing algorithm selection.

* FFmpeg segments are now automatically deleted during transcoding, reducing the space of the transcoding temporary directory.

> * Support for direct playback of DVD and BluRay data folders, preferred over ISOs.

Reviewer 2: Should be `direct stream` - since it is a folder structure, direct play will never be possible

Author: Changed to "direct stream playback" to avoid implying "direct play".

* Support for AV1 hardware and software encoding.

* Support for RK3588 hardware acceleration via MPP.

* Support for Vulkan-based tonemapping with AMD VA-API.

* Support for hardware acceleration on Apple systems (both Apple Silicon and Intel).

* Support for Dolby Vision playback remuxing.

### Scanning, Library & Playlist Management

* Support for lyric scanning and management.

* Season names are now parsed from NFO files.

* The MusicBrainz interface has been improved to better handle music libraries.

* Support for hearing-impaired subtitles (sdh/hi./cc).

> * Support for playlist ACLs with playlist sharing between users and enforcement of playlist ownership.

Reviewer 2: You might want to add a comment here, that existing playlists will be creator-only and permissions for other users need to be manually assigned once if they should be share/global. Playlists sourced from files in a library are always global.

Author: Added additional details

* Docker users: We now offer GHCR as an alternative container registry in addition to DockerHub. You can pull images from the new registry via URIs like `ghcr.io/jellyfin/jellyfin:latest`. Don't worry, we have no plans to drop DockerHub as a container registry, but we feel providing both gives users more choice and flexibility.

## The Big Changes

This release has been nearly (over?) two years in the making, so we're really glad to finally get it out to you. The long cycle does mean quite an extensive changelog however, with well over 1100 pull requests merged into our `master` branch since 10.8.0 first dropped back in 2022. This section will detail all the big changes, broken up by general function and area of the system. In addition to these big items, there are hundreds of smaller bugfixes, quality-of-life tweaks, and other minor changes that we won't touch on here, but if you want to see the full list, you can do so over on the GitHub releases for [the core server](https://github.com/jellyfin/jellyfin/releases/tag/v10.9.0) and [the Web UI](https://github.com/jellyfin/jellyfin-web/releases/tag/v10.9.0).

### General

> * We now support "trickplay" a.k.a. live video scrubbing. When scrubbing through a video with this enabled, you will be able to see a live preview of the video at that timestamp.

Reviewer 3: Do we want to call out that on release day not all clients will support trickplay images, so users will need to watch their chosen client for updates?

Reviewer 4: Could be worth mentioning but it's not only trick play but also all other new features on each release.

Reviewer 3: So more of a general note / reminder that this adds the server capability, but clients will also require updates to use it.

Author: Added client support note.

---
title: Jellyfin 10.9.0
description: We are pleased to announce the latest stable release of Jellyfin, version 10.9.0!
authors: joshuaboniface

> date: 2024-04-28

Reviewer 4: Remove the date from metadata, it will be inferred from the folder structure.

Author: All the existing blog posts have this, are we sure it can be removed?

Reviewer 4: Yes, look at the android posts

> slug: jellyfin-release-10.9.0

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
slug: jellyfin-10.9.0
```

please keep it consistent with the previous posts

Author: Worded badly - basically I need a way to clearly differentiate release blog posts from everything else. I went with this new format both to differentiate for that purpose, and ensure that. They are releases, so having release in the slug seems like a trivial change to me.

Reviewer 4: Ok so going forward the server releases will use this format then?

Author: Correct, the bot looks for this specific slug/branch format to auto-link everything.

* Ubuntu users: We have dropped support for non-LTS Ubuntu releases with 10.9.0. That is, we have not built 10.9.0 packages for any releases except 20.04 LTS, 22.04 LTS, and 24.04 LTS, and we will not publish builds for any new non-LTS releases going forward. For an explanation of why, please see [our previous blog post](https://jellyfin.org/posts/new-ci-new-repo). If you use another release, please upgrade to 24.04 LTS or switch to the Docker container.

* Fedora/CentOS/RHEL/etc. users: We have dropped our official RPM packages and suggest switching to [the 3rd-party RPMFusion repository](https://admin.rpmfusion.org/pkgdb/package/free/jellyfin/) or the Docker container. Support for RHEL-like distributions has been a major pain point for us for a very long time, and we feel that letting the community over at RPMFusion handle this is in our best interest going forward, similar to how Arch, Gentoo, etc. packages are handled. For more details, please see [our previous blog post](https://jellyfin.org/posts/new-ci-new-repo).

> * Docker users: We now offer GHCR as an alternative container registry in addition to DockerHub. You can pull images from the new registry via URIs like `ghcr.io/jellyfin/jellyfin:latest`. Don't worry, we have no plans to drop DockerHub as a container registry, but we feel providing both gives users more choice and flexibility.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Docker users: We now offer GHCR as an alternative container registry in addition to Docker Hub. You can pull images from the new registry via URIs like `ghcr.io/jellyfin/jellyfin:latest`. Don't worry, we have no plans to drop Docker Hub as a container registry, but we feel providing both gives users more choice and flexibility.
```

Author: ```suggestion
* Docker users: We now offer GHCR as an alternative container registry in addition to Docker Hub. You can pull images from the new registry via URIs like `ghcr.io/jellyfin/jellyfin:latest`. Don't worry, we have no plans to drop Docker Hub as a container registry, but we feel providing both gives users more choice and flexibility.
```

> * Docker users: We now offer GHCR as an alternative container registry in addition to DockerHub. You can pull images from the new registry via URIs like `ghcr.io/jellyfin/jellyfin:latest`. Don't worry, we have no plans to drop DockerHub as a container registry, but we feel providing both gives users more choice and flexibility.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Docker users: We now offer GitHub Container Registry (GHCR) as an alternative container registry in addition to DockerHub. You can pull images from the new registry via URIs like `ghcr.io/jellyfin/jellyfin:latest`. Don't worry, we have no plans to drop DockerHub as a container registry, but we feel providing both gives users more choice and flexibility.
```

> * Docker users: We now offer GHCR as an alternative container registry in addition to DockerHub. You can pull images from the new registry via URIs like `ghcr.io/jellyfin/jellyfin:latest`. Don't worry, we have no plans to drop DockerHub as a container registry, but we feel providing both gives users more choice and flexibility.

Author: ```suggestion
* Docker users: We now offer GHCR as an alternative container registry in addition to Docker Hub. You can pull images from the new registry via URIs like `ghcr.io/jellyfin/jellyfin:latest`. Don't worry, we have no plans to drop Docker Hub as a container registry, but we feel providing both gives users more choice and flexibility.
```

### API & Security

* All API endpoints now return proper return codes, ensuring that API endpoint results can be reliably interpreted without additional parsing.

* Our API versioning scheme is now based off of the "last unstable build before a release" and uses a date-based version going forward, to help make it a bit clearer and assist in automating the circular dependencies in our API specifications.

* Parental ratings are significantly improved, with better enforcement, inheritable ratings, and more.

* LiveTV and Collection permissions are now discrete and configurable per-user.

* The EasyPassword (PIN) feature has been removed as this was a big security risk especially for administrator accounts; QuickConnect login is still supported however.

* User permission handling has been unified and numerous bugs fixed, ensuring a more secure server from untrusted users.

### Core Server & Networking

* The underlying .NET framework has been upgraded to version 8, the latest major and LTS release. This brings us many under-the-hood improvements and changes to help with our ongoing effort to streamline the codebase and improve overall performance.

> * Our minimum FFmpeg version has been bumped from 4.0 to 4.4 to take advantage of many new features. For users of our Jellyfin FFmpeg build (Docker, `.deb`/Debuntu repo, and Windows installs), you're already on an even newer version now with FFmpeg 6.0.1, but this minimum change would affect any other platforms.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Our minimum FFmpeg version has been bumped from 4.0 to 4.4 to take advantage of many new features. For users of our Jellyfin FFmpeg build (Docker, `.deb`/Debuntu repo, and Windows installs), you're already on a newer version with FFmpeg 6.0.1, but this minimum change would affect any other platforms.
```
I personally find this easier to read. I had to read the original multiple times 😅

Author: Yea that wording is attrocious, classic 3AM writing from me :D

* Several audio improvements: support for Opus, FLAC, and ALAC codecs in the HLS engine; improved support and handling for transcoding DTS and TrueHD audio streams; new codec enforcement; better bitrate calculations; new audio normalization features; and stereo downmixing algorithm selection.

* FFmpeg segments can now be automatically deleted after the client requests them, significantly reducing the space requirements of the transcoding temporary directory. This optional feature is disabled by default and can be enabled in the transcoding settings.

* Support for direct stream playback of DVD and BluRay data folders, preferred over ISOs.

* Support for AV1 hardware and software encoding.

* Support for RK3588 hardware acceleration via MPP.

* Support for Vulkan-based tonemapping with AMD VA-API.

* Support for complete hardware acceleration on Apple systems (both Apple Silicon and Intel; previously was partial).

* Support for Dolby Vision playback remuxing.

### Scanning, Library & Playlist Management

> * Support for lyric scanning and management.

Reviewer 4: Management part is not available in the web UI.

```suggestion
* Support for scanning and displaying lyrics.
```

* Invalid items will be automatically removed from playlists.

### Clients

* Major fixes for Chromecast, including better support for a self-hosted cast receiver, better local network detection, and connectivity improvements. **We need Chromecast client developers badly - if you are interested please reach out.**

## The Next Version

With our CI improvements outlined previously, we're quite confident that this will be our last "very long" release cycle. Our plan is for the next major version (10.10.0) to be released at most 6 months from now, some time in October. We hope this increased cadence will help alleviate the problems with large releases such as a very long time-to-stable for new features, translations, etc. and help lower the number of major bugs at each major release, streamlining the upgrade process. But this needs everyone's help. Back in October 2023, we made a call for developers, and we've gotten a lot of interest, but this is not a one-and-done event. We need contibutions now more than ever, especially around the web frontend to help implement our planned design changes. If this interests you, please reach out and we can help get you set up.

## Final Thoughts

> We want to thank everyone who contributed to the 10.9.0 release. According to GitHub over 100 people contributed across both repositories, and Jellyfin wouldn't be what it is without your help. We're really proud of this project we've built as a community, and hope to continue to be the go-to FLOSS video streaming solution for a long time to come. Happy watching!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We want to thank everyone who contributed to the 10.9.0 release. According to GitHub over 100 people contributed across both repositories, and Jellyfin wouldn't be what it is without your help. We're really proud of this project we've built as a community, and hope to continue to be the go-to FLOSS media system solution for a long time to come. Happy watching!
```

* We now support AVIF and WEBP images for Pictures libraries.

* Tags are now accounted for during searches, allowing one to search by tag.

* We now support multiple simultaneous subtitle tracks (maximum of two, a primary and secondary) in the web player.

* We've revamped the administrative dashboard UI to help improve usability and ease of finding options.

### API & Security

* All API endpoints now return proper return codes, ensuring that API endpoint results can be reliably interpreted without additional parsing.

* Our API versioning scheme is now based off of the "last unstable build before a release" and uses a date-based version going forward, to help make it a bit clearer and assist in automating the circular dependencies in our API specifications.

* Parental ratings are significantly improved, with better enforcement, inheritable ratings, and more.

* LiveTV and Collection permissions are now discrete and configurable per-user.

> * All playback endpoints now enforce authentication, preventing anonymous users from streaming by potentially guessing item IDs (highly unlikely, but not impossible).

Reviewer 6: I don't believe this is true, eg `/Vidoes/{itemId}/stream` doesn't require auth

Reviewer 4: Correct, this is not in 10.9. Relevant PR: https://github.com/jellyfin/jellyfin/pull/9873

Author: OK it was stated in the list, I guess by @Shadowghost assuming it would be merged by now :) I've just removed this line.

> * The EasyPassword feature has been removed as this was a big security risk especially for administrator accounts; PIN login is still supported.

Reviewer 6: Is PIN login the QuickConnect feature?

Reviewer 4: EasyPassword == pin

QuickConnect is still available.

### Packaging

* The `jellyfin` service user is now automatically added to the `render` and `video` groups on Debian/Ubuntu systems for new installs, helping improve the onboarding for hardware acceleration.

* Packaging is now unified with a new CI system, as outlined in [our previous blog post](https://jellyfin.org/posts/new-ci-new-repo). As a normal user you should see no change here, but this helps massively improve the build process, and if you are building your own packages please reference [the new packaging repository](https://github.com/jellyfin/jellyfin-packaging) for the updated process.

### Transcoding & FFmpeg

* The `--ffmpeg` command-line flag is now the primary method of setting FFmpeg paths, and configuration of the FFmpeg paths via `encoding.xml` is now deprecated. All official packaging will revert to defaults unless explicitly set before upgrade.

* Several audio improvements: support for Opus, FLAC, and ALAC codecs in the HLS engine; improved support and handling for transcoding DTS and TrueHD audio streams; new codec enforcement; better bitrate calculations; new audio normalization features; and stereo downmixing algorithm selection.

> * FFmpeg segments are now automatically deleted during transcoding, significantly reducing the space requirements of the transcoding temporary directory.

Reviewer 7: I was a bit disappointed to read this until I found out it was a configurable behavior.

* Support for direct stream playback of DVD and BluRay data folders, preferred over ISOs.

* Support for AV1 hardware and software encoding.

* Support for RK3588 hardware acceleration via MPP.

* Support for Vulkan-based tonemapping with AMD VA-API.

> * Support for hardware acceleration on Apple systems (both Apple Silicon and Intel).

Reviewer 8: 10.8 already supports partial hardware acceleration on apple platforms
10.9 brings support for full acceleration
